a global outcry after the discovery of
mass graves in two Gaza hospitals Israel
is under pressure to provide answers but
will it and how will it be held to
account this is inside
[Music]
story hello and welcome to the program
I'm Muhammad jamj more bodies have been
found in Mass graves in Gaza after
Israeli forces withdrew from the nasur
and alifa medical compounds they had
besieged for weeks the Palestinian civil
defense says there is clear evidence the
Israeli Army committed crimes against
humanity by carrying out summary
executions the UN and EU are calling for
Urgent investigations and the US says it
once answers to international law
demands a thorough and independent
inquiry to uncover the truth behind
these deaths and ensure accountability
but will Israel ever be held to account
for its actions in Gaza we'll put that
to our guests in a moment first this
report from Axel
zovich a haunting site at the Naser
medical facility in KH Unis where bodies
remain
unclaimed evidence of a mass grave has
come to light after the Israeli Army
left the compound these are not the only
victims found in Gaza at the beginning
of April similar discoveries were made
at alifa hospital following an Israeli
military operation satellite images
confirmed the exist existence of two
mass cves in these Hospital premises we
feel the need to raise the alarm to
raise the alarm because clearly there
have been um multiple bodies discovered
uh we don't know how many there are
reports that some of them had their
hands tied which of course indicates um
serious violations of international
human human rights law and international
humanitarian
law women wounded and older people
buried deep and covered in waste are
among the victims as the bodies begin to
decompose
there's a pressing call for an
investigation experts say an independent
inquiry needs a neutral party if you
want an
independent organization to do it go to
a country if you find one that's willing
to go into Gaza that is not engaged in
the conflict by the supply of arms or
otherwise and ask them if they'll put
together a forensic team that will go in
and do the job and I think that happened
occasionally in the former Yugoslavia
where you had a great deal of mass grave
work that had to be done for
investigations were conducted after Mass
Graves were found in stonit and other
towns in bosnan
heroa the international Commission on
missing persons initiated by former US
President Bill Clinton helped in
identifying victims and Prosecuting war
crimes with similar investigations
underway in Ukraine and Syria after the
discovery of mass burial sites many
wonder if the international Focus will
shift to
Gaza the question is if Israel will
allow impartial investigators to enter
the strip since it already stands
accused of genocide at the international
court of justice addressing these Mass
Graves is crucial not only for the
families seeking closure but for the
broader goals of finding Justice and
preventing such acts from happening ever
again Axel zovich Al jazer for Inside
Story all right let's go ahead and bring
in our guests in Doha Mansour Shuman
Gaza citizen journalists who took Refuge
at ner hospital for months during the
conflict in the he Andreas Kiser
director for policy and cooperation at
the international Commission on missing
persons and in Geneva Kenneth Roth
visiting professor at Princeton school
for public and international Affairs and
the former Executive Director of Human
Rights Watch a warm welcome to you all
and thanks so much for joining us today
on Inside Story Mansour let me start
with you today the Palestinian civil
defense team says evidence from Mass
graves in the grounds of nasar Hospital
in Khan yunas clearly shows the Israeli
Army carried out summary execution
you're in touch with people on the
ground there you spent so much time
there yourself what are you
hearing what I'm hearing is that this is
yet another Mass grave found in another
hospital in another part of Gaza Strip
we found something similar in the north
of Gaza in the middle region of Gaza in
Gaza City itself and now we're finding
it in nasar hospital around 400 bodies
have now been found uh covered in
different kinds of plastic covers
different colors um many of the people
have been identified and some of them I
have known personally when whether they
were nurses doctors patients in the
hospital or even women and children who
were residents of the ground in nasar
hospital there at the same time many
bodies there have been found but have
not been identified yet because their
limbs have been cut their heads are not
there anymore many of them have lost
their organs and then zipped up again um
it is horrendous it is surreal that
after over 200 days we are still talking
about investigations and forensic
studies where we all know who the
perpetrator of this war crimes are and
to be honest um I don't know for how
long the world can stay silent regarding
what is happening right now in addition
to this Mass grave in nasar hospital let
me remind the viewers that there are
tens of thousands of those not only that
have been killed and injured but those
who we do not know where they are so we
are fear them of or of seeing so many
other Mass Graves similar to this one
and what a shame that the International
Community is still quiet and is still
not doing anything to stop these
genocide attempts against the
Palestinian people in Gaza Kenneth Gaza
is a war zone how is it possible to go
about Gathering evidence when this kind
of conflict is going on and so much
evidence can and is being
destroyed well I think what you speak to
is first of all the importance of
physical presence and the Israeli
government has blocked physical presence
both by Foreign journalists but also by
human rights Defenders and perhaps you
know most important because here we're
speaking about accountability they have
refused access to investigators the
international criminal court the
international body that has jurisdiction
over war crimes in Gaza and could very
well prosecute the perpetrators here so
it's not impossible to do an
investigation in the middle of of a war
I mean this would require you know
simply cooperation by the both sides I'm
sure that you know Hamas would give safe
passage the real question is what Israel
but Israel doesn't want to give safe
passage it doesn't want to allow these
kind of independent investigations it
just wants to kind of sweep the issue
under the rug or or maybe it'll do what
it usually do which is to say we're
going to investigate ourselves which
typically results in either we never
hear anything again or a whitewash and I
think it's you know that
whitewashing which is why both the
United Nations and the European Union
have stressed the importance of an
independent investigation that means not
an Israeli self-investigation now the US
government hasn't yet gone that far they
have sought a thorough and transparent
investigation
but they didn't use the magic word an
independent investigation but that's
what we need we need somebody other than
the Israelis to look at this and we need
access sooner rather than later because
you know bodies decompose and it's more
difficult over time to figure out
exactly what happened Andreas when it
comes to mass grave sites and
investigating and preserving forensic
evidence how crucial is it that
professional forensic experts with the
right kind of equipment with the needed
resources that they're able to act
access those sites as quickly as
possible so that the sites aren't
contaminated yes thank you indeed um
it's absolutely critical that um proper
forensic um um investigations are
carried out there um entails employing
uh forensic archaeologists and
anthropologists um it is likewise a
critical these um investigations are
conducted in an official framework so
the the question iMed immediately
imposes itself I mean who can um mandate
um effectively um an independent
investigation now we we know that steps
have been taken by the United Nations so
potentially that would provide a
framework if um an invitation is
extended to an international um
organization that can assist in such um
in such investigations now we've heard
already that in identifications of
victims are taking place place that is
um presumably um done not necessarily
employing scientific means which um
incurs um certain um risks um so these
um identifications will probably have
have to be confirmed that should also be
included um so to um point to the uh to
previous experience of course um the
international Commission on missing
persons icmp has been um extensively
assisting with um excavations Mass grave
um examinations recovering victims and
um identifying remains um in support of
um domestic and also International
authorities also in the context of
criminal investigations in particular in
the former Yugoslavia um what is
critical to keep in mind is that all
investigations should be done U with a
view uh of collecting evidence to a
standard that will hold up in a court of
law MH um it is clear that um um alleged
perpetrators have a different um
Narrative of mass grav then um um the
public or or or witnesses will present
and to have a convincing account provide
irrefutable evidence of what happened it
is important to have Experts of a high
caliber
involved Mansour you spoke earlier about
the frustration when it comes to hearing
International actors and rights bodies
call for investigations and yet still
atrocities are happening I I want to ask
you about the fact that after the
discovery of of this latest Mass grave
there are more calls there are calls
from the EU and the UN for a for an
independent investigation uh you have
the the US calling for a transparent
investigation but they're not going as
far as calling for an independent
investigation do you do you think there
will be sufficient International
pressure now that this could actually
happen or will it be more of the
same unfortunately I think the way uh
the laws are set up in the world right
now especially on the international
stage is that the support and the one
who is right is the one who is strong
the one who has the power and right now
the veto power right now is in the hands
of the US and allies of the Zionist
State unfortunately I do not have a lot
of um a lot of confidence that the
international agencies can do anything I
remember when I was in nasar hospital
together with tens of thousands of
others of refugees in the hospital and
in the schools around us we were told by
these International agencies that we
were in a safe place we were in a safe
Zone that the IDF will not attack and
that we have nothing to worry we have
nothing to fear however on one morning
the IDF came in with their trucks with
with their with their um forklifts with
their tanks with their soldiers and
attacked the people inside the schools
inside the Naser hospital and forced
people like myself to flee and in
addition to that it took with it
hundreds of
lives I I it's like we're talking about
two different parallel worlds here
you're talking about a world where
Theory and human rights talk about what
should and will happen but the reality
is that what is happening right now
cannot wait for these International
agencies to talk to us about what should
happen because time is running out time
is running out and what has happened in
Nas hospital now is going to happen soon
in Raf in the hospitals there to the
people there and the the blood of these
people will be stained on these
international organization reputations
and these countries around the world
claiming human rights and democracies
for what is happening right now will be
a stain on everyone right now who is
calling for the right thing to be done
but is not doing it we need action
enough words we need action on the
ground right now Kenneth I saw you're
reacting there to what Mansour was
saying um he's talking about the fact
that he along with others were housing
themselves in these medical complexes
that are supposed to be protected under
International humanitarian law and yet
time and again we've seen
these hospitals and medical complexes
come under siege in in Gaza will these
words translate into action will Israel
be held to account for this what needs
to happen for this to
stop well first and and the point of the
hospitals I mean hospitals are
presumptively protected they can lose
their protected status if the other side
uses them for military purposes now
Israel has you know a history here of
saying
that Hamas you know for example was
supposed to have a major Command Center
under Aliva hospital and that was going
to justify Israel going in and you know
basically occupying the biggest Hospital
in Gaza at a point of acute need at a
point where people are being bombed
every day you know this is exactly when
you need a hospital and Israel took it
over you know evacuated the patients and
that was the first time there have been
two takeovers in ALA but you know when
they at the end of that to show this
supposed Command Center what did they
show us you know a handful of rifles you
know a little bit of military equipment
one tunnel that a former Israeli Prime
Minister said actually you know we the
Israelis built back when we controlled
Gaza City so you know they've been very
unsuccessful in demonstrating the
military justification for taking over
these hospitals and in a sense what you
see is they seem to be weaponizing
Palestinians need for healthcare a
moment of acute need by depriving them
you know of the physical facilities I
mean now I think the the w ho says 10
out of the 36 hospitals are minimally
functioning you know Israel's been
blockading you know really preventing
much of the necessary medical equipment
from coming in so you know this is um a
direct assault on the Palestinian
civilian population now you know the
good question is well what can we do
about this um and let's talk about you
know both the international criminal
court and the US government because I
think these are parallel processes the
international criminal court I mean it
is difficult at this moment it doesn't
permission to go into GSA so something
you know like a mass grave which really
does require a forensic investigation as
we've just heard it's going to be hard
for it to do that but there are major
war crimes where the international
criminal court already has the evidence
you know one which is not even about
Gaza is the settlements you know the
settlements are a war crime they're a
violation of article 49 of the forest
Geneva Convention which prohibits an
occupying power from sending its
population into occupied territory
Kareem Khan the chief prosecutor has
that evidence the people ordering the
the settlements are going up to the top
he hasn't done anything the other thing
that he do you know he's talked
repeatedly about this he has the
evidence that Israel is blocking food
it's starvation strategy he doesn't need
you know more evidence from inside Gaza
he has that he's threatened to act on it
but he
hasn't Andreas let me ask you to follow
up on a point that Kenneth was making
there because I saw you reacting to some
of what he was saying when it comes to
these issues of international Justice um
without an independent investigation
taking place can the discovery of let's
say this latest Mass grave can that be
added to some of these forums where
cases may be happening like let's say
the international court of justice the
case of South Africa brought against
Israel accusing it of genocide in Gaza
or if the IC were to take up the case
and get involved
later from from oer
uh also going back to the former
Yugoslavia and the trials that took
place in the he including the the trials
um of Mr madich and Dr
karic um concerning crimes in and
around um it is crucial uh to be able to
um provide evidence of the circumstances
of the establishment of these Mass
Graves uh of who is in these Mass Graves
of um um evidence of um um of crimes
including trauma so it takes
anthropological examinations of the
remains um otherwise uh it is perfectly
um Fe possible for alleged
perpetrators um to claim that um M race
are in fact um um and that exists too um
legitimate in the sense that um persons
found remains found in these Mas Braes
um um died of various causes died in
combat um were brought to um two two
hospital locations um where they
eventually um died um and mqu can be
legitimately used um for purposes of um
um a dignified treatment of human
remains on a a temporary basis until
proper um um rituals and commemorations
can be carried out all of these
arguments have been made uh in in uh
trials before the international criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and
needed to be refuted with um strong and
clear evidence Mansour if I could ask
you more of a personal question you
talked about your experience there at at
n hospital and Those whom you know who
who have been there when it comes to
making the choice to try and take refuge
at a site where people are being told
that it is protected and yet the fear is
that it will not be protected that it
will be attacked what is that choice
like for Palestinians in Gaza who want
to just protect themselves and their
family
members um I think the the Palestinians
in Gazza right now believe they don't
have a choice H they never did have a
choice before the nas Hospital raid or
after it they're just trying to seek
Refuge wherever they can
away from the IDF and its genocide
attempt um please remember that drones
hover had H is is hovering over them
24/7 you know in kind of a psychological
warfare uh in addition to the
expectation that at any moment they can
be targeted their loved ones can be
targeted they can lose further uh things
that they have owned whether it be
tangible or intangible I mean it we're
talking about the physical impact on
Gaza but later on uh we are going to be
starting to measure the the mental
impact the trauma impact and I think
that uh the time for um investigation
and uh looking into who is perpetrated
this is I mean this is I think I think
we're all done with this right now we're
talking about taking action and a big
salutation to the to the tens of
thousands of students across the world
especially in the United States
universities who are taking on their
campuses saying that you know it's time
to free Palestine it's time to ensure
that Gaza has a permanent ceasefire and
that Aid reaches the people there you
know they the politicians and those in
power need to listen to this generation
that is now looking at at things from
from from an impartial view seeing the
evidence firsthand being sent live on
television on different social media
platforms um the Palestinians on the
ground
will will stay steadfast they know that
they are on the side right side of
History they do not want a repeat of
1948 and
1967 and they cannot do that without the
support of people like here at Al jazer
trying to show the news people around
the world demonstrating continuing to
boycott continuing to Lobby their
politicians it's important that everyone
continues to do that because all of that
results in a positive impact on the
people on the ground in Palestine who
continue to try to hear the news try to
get the aid that is that is reaching
them in in trickles I I was talking to a
friend who is in kanun and he was
telling me about about his brother that
was in one of these Mass Graves and and
and he said that Mansour despite us
seeing all of this at least I know that
I've seen my brother I've seen my
brother I've seen him in in in his flesh
and I know what happened to him
hopefully he's in a better place in
Paradise but think about the thousands
who are still don't know the fate of
their loved ones again people in Gaza
are looking for Action so we are asking
those International organizations we are
asking the UN the icg to do right now
what Palestinians need put an end to
this war open make a permanent ceasefire
ensure there's a no fly zone above
Palestine announce a free Palestinian
State and make sure that Aid reaches 2.3
million Palestinians that need it right
now Kenneth I saw you reacting to some
of what Monsur was saying there it
looked like you wanted to jump in so
please go
ahead yeah I mean our um you know we're
focusing most of this show on the
Justice the accountability question
which is it's important and obviously if
Kem Khan were to charge you know
Netanyahu for example that would be a
big deterrent for these kinds of war
crimes but you know I think manour is
absolutely right that the real issue
here is stopping the killing you know
how do you stop the bombardment of
civilians how do you stop the starvation
of Civ
and you know the one person in the world
who really has the capacity to exert
sufficient pressure on Netanyahu is Joe
Biden um and you know we saw that even
when he sort of vaguely threatened to
condition us Aid if Netanyahu didn't
allow in more food suddenly a little bit
more food was allowed in but Biden has
not really been willing to exert that
linkage he hasn't been willing to say
I'm going to stop arming and funding
your war crimes until they stop period
and you know he at this point is still
discussing with Netanyahu how do you
attack Rafa you know how do you move 1.4
million people to a you know a
beachfront that is utterly unprepared to
to receive them and where you know given
history Israel would just bomb anyhow so
you know what we really need is Biden to
pressure Netanyahu and Biden's only
going to do that if he sees a real
political cost for his current AR arming
and complicity in this war crimes and so
that's why the protests in the United
States really matter you know Biden has
an election coming up he does have to
care about public opinion and public
opinion is very rapidly souring on
Biden's complicity in these War crims
Andreas we don't have a whole lot of
time left but it looked like you were
reacting to what Kenneth was saying
there so I want to give you a chance to
jump in if you wanted
to icmp the international Commission on
missing person has made it very clear
that stands ready to um um assist MRA in
the uh investigation um at the request
of authorities um and that move will of
course have to have the backing of the
United Nations it will have to have um
um the backing of the of the parties um
we fully understand that um there are
big question marks whether the parties
will be willing to um permit a forensic
investigation on the ground uh I would
want to however underline as was said
earlier that um it is not excluded
carrying out such an independent um
investigation in the short term if um um
conditions and in particular the
participation or the under the
permission of the parties is present um
I think that's um that's to be kept in
mind and while I fully understand and
it's absolutely understandable to to see
a disappointment um with um
International organizations in
particular one has to keep in mind that
International organizations do depend on
the willingness of parties to cooperate
Mansour despite where things stand right
now despite how dire the situation is in
Gaza are you hopeful that eventually
there will be accountability do you
think that there will be sufficient
pressure on Israel that in the long term
um there will be accountability 100%
100% I am hopeful together with all
other Palestinians and those who love
freedom around the world history repeats
itself look what happened in South
Africa s something similar is going to
happen here in in Gazza and festine it's
just a matter of time I think slowly
International pressure if you look at
the macropolitics it's changing if you
look at the moods of of the people it's
changing if you look at the media
covering it's changing so I think it
will happen it's just a matter of time
but the question is how much more will
the Palestinians in Gaza need to suffer
before this time comes in and I hope not
not not not I hope not not any more time
all right we have run out of time so
we're going to have to leave the
conversation there thanks so much to all
of our guests today Mansour Shuman
Andreas Kiser and Kenneth
Roth and thank you too for watching you
can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website eler.com and for
further discussion go to our Facebook
page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insid story you can
also join the conversation on X our
handle is at AJ J inside story from me
Muhammad jamj and the entire team here
bye for now
[Music]